# keypoint-informed-transformer-model-with-feature-enhancement

Urban green spaces (UGS) play a vital role in mitigating the urban heat island effect, yet their cooling efficiency remains poorly understood due to the complex interactions among various landscape metrics. Therefore, an urgent need exists for a predictive tool to effectively interpret and quantify the non-linear relationships governing UGS cooling performance. To bridge this gap, this paper develops a novel Keypoint-informed Transformer-based deep learning model integrating with feature enhancement (FE-KFormer) to accurate predicting UGS cooling efficiency in built environment. The FE-KFormer model can also predict future UGS cooling efficiency based on changes in landscape metrics. To generate a high-resolution thermal dataset, land surface temperature is retrieved through the fusion of MODIS and Landsat 8 imagery. This fused dataset is then used to train the developed FE-KFormer model. Compared with traditional machine learning methods (e.g., Random Forest, LightGBM), the FE-KFormer model demonstrates substantially higher prediction accuracy, with mean absolute error and root mean squared error reduced by approximately 85% and R² reaching 0.8. By varying the landscape metric features, prediction results from the FE-KFormer model reveal a positive correlation between area-related and connectivity-related metrics and UGS cooling effects, while shape-related and density-related metrics show a negative correlation. CI is more sensitive to changes in the landscape matrices than CD. The FE-KFormer model can serve as a decision-support tool for urban planners, enabling them to evaluate the cooling performance of UGS and assess the potential impact of different planning strategies through the lens of landscape metrics.
